I've wanted to write something about my own research for a while, so here comes an attempt at understanding what we learn from climate model simulations with setups that don't have clear analogies in the real world.

My PhD project is about understanding the impacts of large volcanic eruptions on stratospheric composition and chemistry. Using the climate model CESM1 we explore aspects of ozone chemistry and other impacts from injecting volcanic stuff into the the middle stratosphere. This stuff is, more specifically, sulfate aerosols and halogen gases (chlorine (Cl) and bromine (Br)). 

A very short primer on volcanic impacts on the global atmosphere (see also Robock 2000, Solomon 1999 and von Glashow 2010): Volcanic CO2 is minor, so is the erupted rocks and dust. Some large volcanoes emit huge amounts of sulfur dioxide gas which is transported by the eruption and dumped into the stratosphere. Here it forms small particles called aerosols which reflect and absorb incoming solar and outgoing infrared radiation. On balance the impact of this is cooling the surface and warming the stratosphere with a lot of cascading effects mediated by atmospheric dynamics (winter warming pattern in the arctic for instance). In addition to sulfur, many volcanoes emit large quantities of halogen gases, mostly in the form of hydrogen chloride (HCl) and hydrogen bromide (HBr). If these guys get into the stratosphere they will be converted into ozone depleting halogen radicals. The same compounds are released form CFCs and other anthropogenic ozone depletin substances. If the injected amount is large we would expect significant ozone depletion caused by volcanic eruptions. Ozone depletion cools the stratosphere, other than that, I'm not sure if there are robust surface impacts except increases in ultraviolet radiation.

I (and the people I work with) are conducting model simulations with several significant assumptions, simplifications and idealisations in addition to the ones you do just by using a general circulation model. My subjective ranking of these in order from most to least important would be something like this:

1. Fixed sea surface temperatures, reading the same year over and over again from an input file (we mostly focus on impacts in the free atmosphere so to save computer resources we neglect oceanic responses, but this basically invalidates any surface impacts we see)
2. We assume 10% of emitted halogen gas gets into the stratosphere (This is highly contested in the scientific community and is currently neglected, but I believe the evidence will come down on my side, but it's a risk)
3. Fixed land surface
4. We simulate a representative eruption that never actually took place, and neglect the actual transport phase with eruption product just appearing in the stratosphere (Generated from the average over estimated eruption and placed in a representative location)
5. Sulfur aerosols are prescribed using data generated for a different eruption.
6. The quasi-biannual oscillation is fixed in the easterly phase (The model cannot generate it's own QBO)